ROUNDTABLE: RISING POWERS AND THE INTERNATIONAL ORDER

Why the Liberal World Order Will
Survive
G. John Ikenberry

T

he international order built and led by the United States and its partners is in crisis. In the Middle East, East Asia, and even in Western
Europe, long-standing regional orders are in transition or breaking
down. Global international agreements and institutions—across the realms of
trade, arms control, environment, human rights—seem to be weakening. For
seventy years the United States has stood at the center of a Western-oriented,
liberal international system, organized around openness, rules, and multilateral
cooperation. After the cold war this American liberal hegemonic order spread
outward and seemed to offer the world a universal logic for global politics.
But that unipolar moment has now passed. Today, the United States and the
Western industrial democracies, roiled by nationalist and populist upheavals,
have turned inward and appear less committed to their own post-war liberal
international project.
The crisis of the American-led international order would seem to open up new
opportunities for rising states—notably China, India, and other non-Western
developing countries—to reshape the global order. But in what ways are rising
states seeking to reform or reorganize the rules and institutions of the post-war
era? Do they seek to rise up and integrate into the existing international order
or do they seek to transform it? Are they “stakeholder” or “revisionist” states?
Over the past decade, these questions have stood at the center of debates about
the future of the global system. Indeed, the Obama administration placed the challenge of integrating rising states at the center of its foreign policy. In the words of
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, the American goal was to create not a “multipolar” world order but a “multi-partner” one. A grand bargain seemed to be on
offer: rising states would be welcomed into the leadership core of governance
Ethics & International Affairs, , no.  (), pp. –.
©  Carnegie Council for Ethics in International Affairs
doi:./S

17

institutions in exchange for agreeing to embrace its rules and norms and shoulder
greater burdens in providing public goods. In the meantime, the  ﬁnancial
crisis seemed to weaken and discredit aspects of the American-led liberal international order, creating opportunities for China in particular to advance claims for
its own leadership. China’s ambitious plans for the newly established Asian
Infrastructure Investment Bank and the One Belt, One Road vision for Eurasian
economic cooperation are striking reﬂections of shifting power relations and
struggles over the terms of global order.
In this essay I look at the evolving encounters between rising states and the
post-war Western international order. My starting point is the classic “power transition” perspective. Power transition theories see a tight link between international
order—its emergence, stability, and decline—and the rise and fall of great powers.
It is a perspective that sees history as a sequence of cycles in which powerful or
hegemonic states rise up and build order and dominate the global system until
their power declines, leading to a new cycle of crisis and order building. In
contrast, I offer a more evolutionary perspective, emphasizing the lineages and
continuities in modern international order. More speciﬁcally, I argue that
although America’s hegemonic position may be declining, the liberal international
characteristics of order—openness, rules, multilateral cooperation—are deeply
rooted and likely to persist. This is true even though the orientation and actions
of the Trump administration have raised serious questions about the U.S. commitment to liberal internationalism. Just as importantly, rising states (led by China)
are not engaged in a frontal attack on the American-led order. While struggles do
exist over orientations, agendas, and leadership, the non-Western developing
countries remain tied to the architecture and principles of a liberal-oriented global
order. And even as China seeks in various ways to build rival regional institutions,
there are stubborn limits on what it can do.

Power Transitions and International Order
There is wide agreement that the world is witnessing a long-term global power
transition. Wealth and power is diffusing, spreading outward and away from
Europe and the United States. The rapid growth that marked the non-Western rising states in the last decade may have ended, and even China’s rapid economic
ascendency has slowed. But the overall pattern of change remains: the “rest” are
gaining ground on the “West.”
18

G. John Ikenberry

While there is wide agreement that the world is witnessing a global power transition, there is less agreement on the consequences of power shifts for international order. The classic view is advanced by realist scholars, such as
E. H. Carr, Robert Gilpin, Paul Kennedy, and William Wohlforth, who make
sweeping arguments about power and order. These hegemonic realists argue
that international order is a by-product of the concentration of power. Order is
created by a powerful state, and when that state declines and power diffuses, international order weakens or breaks apart. Out of these dynamic circumstances, a
rising state emerges as the new dominant state, and it seeks to reorganize the
international system to suit its own purposes. In this view, world politics from
ancient times to the modern era can be seen as a series of repeated cycles
of rise and decline. War, protectionism, depression, political upheaval—various
sorts of crises and disruptions may push the cycle forward.
This narrative of hegemonic rise and decline draws on the European and, more
broadly, Western experience. Since the early modern era, Europe has been
organized and reorganized by a succession of leading states and would-be hegemons: the Spanish Hapsburgs, France of Louis XIV and Napoleon, and
post-Bismarck Germany. The logic of hegemonic order comes even more clearly
into view with Pax Britannica, the nineteenth-century hegemonic order based on
British naval and mercantile dominance. The decline of Britain was followed by
decades of war and economic instability, which ended only with the rise of Pax
Americana. For hegemonic realists, the debate today is about where the world
is along this cyclical pathway of rise and decline. Has the United States ﬁnally
lost the ability or willingness to underwrite and lead the post-war order? Are
we in the midst of a hegemonic crisis and the breakdown of the old order?
And are rising states, led by China, beginning to step forward in efforts to establish
their own hegemonic dominance of their regions and the world? These are the
lurking questions of the power transition perspective.
But does this vision of power transition truly illuminate the struggles going on
today over international order? Some might argue no—that the United States is
still in a position, despite its travails, to provide hegemonic leadership. Here
one would note that there is a durable infrastructure (or what Susan Strange
has called “structural power”) that undergirds the existing American-led order.
Far-ﬂung security alliances, market relations, liberal democratic solidarity, deeply
rooted geopolitical alignments—there are many possible sources of American hegemonic power that remain intact. But there may be even deeper sources of

why the liberal world order will survive

19

continuity in the existing system. This would be true if the existence of a
liberal-oriented international order does not in fact require hegemonic domination. It might be that the power transition theory is wrong: the stability and persistence of the existing post-war international order does not depend on the
concentration of American power.
In fact, international order is not simply an artifact of concentrations of power.
The rules and institutions that make up international order have a more complex
and contingent relationship with the rise and fall of state power. This is true in two
respects. First, international order itself is complex: multilayered, multifaceted,
and not simply a political formation imposed by the leading state. International
order is not “one thing” that states either join or resist. It is an aggregation of various sorts of ordering rules and institutions. There are the deep rules and norms of
sovereignty. There are governing institutions, starting with the United Nations.
There is a sprawling array of international institutions, regimes, treaties, agreements, protocols, and so forth. These governing arrangements cut across diverse
realms, including security and arms control, the world economy, the environment
and global commons, human rights, and political relations. Some of these
domains of governance may have rules and institutions that narrowly reﬂect the
interests of the hegemonic state, but most reﬂect negotiated outcomes based on
a much broader set of interests.
As rising states continue to rise, they do not simply confront an American-led
order; they face a wider conglomeration of ordering rules, institutions, and
arrangements; many of which they have long embraced. By separating
“American hegemony” from “the existing international order,” we can see a
more complex set of relationships. The United States does not embody the international order; it has a relationship with it, as do rising states. The United States
embraces many of the core global rules and institutions, such as the United
Nations, International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank, and World Trade
Organization. But it also has resisted ratiﬁcation of the Law of the Sea
Convention and the Convention on the Rights of the Child (it being the only
country not to have ratiﬁed the latter) as well as various arms control and disarmament agreements. China also embraces many of the same global rules and
institutions, and resists ratiﬁcation of others. Generally speaking, the more fundamental or core the norms and institutions are—beginning with the Westphalian
norms of sovereignty and the United Nations system—the more agreement

20

G. John Ikenberry

there is between the United States and China as well as other states.
Disagreements are most salient where human rights and political principles are
in play, such as in the Responsibility to Protect.
Second, there is also diversity in what rising states “want” from the international
order. The struggles over international order take many different forms. In some
instances, what rising states want is more inﬂuence and control of territory and
geopolitical space beyond their borders. One can see this in China’s efforts to
expand its maritime and political inﬂuence in the South China Sea and other
neighboring areas. This is an age-old type of struggle captured in realist accounts
of security competition and geopolitical rivalry. Another type of struggle is over
the norms and values that are enshrined in global governance rules and institutions. These may be about how open and rule-based the system should be.
They may also be about the way human rights and political principles are deﬁned
and brought to bear in relations among states. Finally, the struggles over international order may be focused on the distribution of authority. That is, rising states
may seek a greater role in the governance of existing institutions. This is a struggle
over the position of states within the global political hierarchy: voting shares, leadership rights, and authority relations.
These observations cut against the realist hegemonic perspective and cyclical
theories of power transition. Rising states do not confront a single, coherent, hegemonic order. The international order offers a buffet of options and choices.
They can embrace some rules and institutions and not others. Moreover, stepping
back, the international orders that rising states have faced in different historical
eras have not all been the same order. The British-led order that Germany faced
at the turn of the twentieth century is different from the international order that
China faces today. The contemporary international order is much more complex
and wide-ranging than past orders. It has a much denser array of rules, institutions, and governance realms. There are also both regional and global domains of
governance. This makes it hard to imagine an epic moment when the international order goes into crisis and rising states step forward—either China alone
or rising states as a bloc—to reorganize and reshape its rules and institutions.
Rather than a cyclical dynamic of rise and decline, change in the existing
American-led order might best be captured by terms such as continuity, evolution, adaptation, and negotiation. The struggles over international order today
are growing, but it is not a drama best told in terms of the rise and decline of
American hegemony.

why the liberal world order will survive

21

Sources of Continuity in Liberal International Order
If the liberal international order endures, it will be because it is based on more
than American hegemonic order. To be sure, the United States did give shape
to a distinctive post-war liberal hegemonic system, and many of its features—
including the American-led alliance system and multilateral economic governance
arrangements—are themselves quite durable. But the broader features of the modern international order are the result of centuries of struggle over its organizing
principles and institutions. Rising states face an international order that is long
in the making, one that presents these non-Western developing states with opportunities as well as constraints. The struggles over the existing international order
will reshape the rules and institutions in the existing system in various ways. But
rising states are not simply or primarily “revisionist” states seeking to overturn the
order; rather, they are seeking greater access and authority over its operation.
Indeed, the order creates as many safeguards and protections for rising states as
it creates obstacles and constraints. For example, the World Trade Organization
provides rules and mechanisms for rising states to dispute trade discrimination
and protect access to markets. After all, more generally, it was this liberal-oriented
international order—its openness and rules—that provided the conditions for
China and other rising states to rise. Indeed, if the liberal international order survives, it will be in large part due to the fact that the constituencies for such an
order that stretch across the Western and the non-Western worlds are larger
than the constituencies that oppose it. We can look more closely at these sources
of continuity and constituency.
Long-Term Ordering Projects
The existing international order is not just the product of American power but of
two long-term internationalist projects. One is what can be called the Westphalian
project. Beginning in the seventeenth century and continuing through to the present, European states—and later the wider world—have struggled to create and
expand the rules and institutions of the sovereign state system. The Peace of
Westphalia of  is widely seen as a watershed moment when norms of state
sovereignty were put at the center of an evolving European political order. The
founding principles of the Westphalian system—sovereignty, territorial integrity,
and nonintervention—reﬂected an emerging consensus that states were the rightful political units for the establishment of legitimate rule. Over the centuries other

22

G. John Ikenberry

norms and principles, such as self-determination and nondiscrimination, were
added and elaborated within the evolving Westphalian system. The post-war settlements of , , , and  provided historical moments when these
organizing ideas were hammered out.
Westphalian norms of sovereignty were originally only a European project, but
in the twentieth century they went global. Under the banner of sovereignty and
self-determination, political movements for decolonization and independence
were set in motion in the non-Western developing world. Westphalian norms
have been violated and ignored at times, but they have been the most salient
and agreed upon rules and principles of international order in the modern era.
“The genius of the Westphalian system, and the reason it spread across the
world,” as Henry Kissinger argues, “was that its provisions were procedural, not
substantive.” If a state agreed to the basic rules of the Westphalian system, “it
could be recognized as an international citizen able to maintain its own culture,
politics, religion, and internal policies, shielded by the international system
from outside intervention.” The Westphalian state system was European in origin, but within its organizational logic were inchoate universal ideas that were
seized upon by other peoples and societies around the world.
It was this globalizing Westphalian system that provided the foundation for the
liberal international project. Fundamentally, the liberal project has entailed efforts
by liberal great powers to orient world politics in the direction of openness and at
least loosely rule-based relations. Beyond this, the liberal project has had a diversity of visions and agendas, including open markets, multilateral institutions,
cooperative security, shared sovereignty, and the rule of law. In the nineteenth
century the liberal project was manifest in Britain’s championing of free trade
and freedom of the seas. The emerging Western liberal democracies pursued various sorts of “internationalisms” in areas such as commerce, law, war and peace,
and social justice. In the twentieth century the liberal project was pushed forward
by the United States and its partners after the two world wars. After World War II
the American architects of post-war order, drawing lessons from the Wilsonian
failure and incorporating ideas from the New Deal period, also advanced more
ambitious ideas about economic and political cooperation embodied in the
Bretton Woods institutions. As the cold war unfolded, in both security and economic realms, the United States found itself taking on new commitments and
functional roles. Its own economic and political system became, in effect, the
central component of the larger liberal hegemonic order.

why the liberal world order will survive

23

Both projects—the Westphalian and liberal internationalist—were founded on
ideas that were implicitly universal in their normative and legal-political scope.
The struggles and upheavals of the twentieth century, most notably the collapse
and defeat of the great empires and the spread of nationalism and
de-colonialization movements, pushed and pulled these ideas outward. Liberal
internationalism across the last two centuries has been premised on a stable system of states. Wilsonian-era liberal internationalism coopted Westphalian notions
of sovereignty and self-determination, even if Wilson himself did not fully
acknowledge nationalist aspirations outside the West. Roosevelt-era liberal internationalism went further and sought to empower states to pursue progressive
goals of social and economic rights and protections. To be sure, some strands
of liberal internationalism—particularly the recent norm of Responsibility to
Protect—argue for abridgements of sovereignty, giving the international community rights and obligations to intervene in societies to protect lives. But the great
expanse of Westphalian and liberal international rules and norms are deeply
embedded in a widely agreed upon vision of the modern foundations of world
politics. Rising states are operating within this broad framework of ordering
rules and institutions.
Self-Reinforcing Characteristics of Liberal International Order
The United States has dominated the post-war international order. It is an order
built on asymmetries of power; it is hierarchical. But it is not an imperial system. It
is a complex and multilayered political formation with liberal characteristics—
openness and rules-based principles—that generate incentives and opportunities
for other states to join and operate within it.
Four characteristics reinforce and draw states into the order. First, it has integrative tendencies. Over the last century states with diverse characteristics have
found pathways into its “ecosystem” of rules and institutions. Germany and
Japan found roles and positions of authority in the post-war order; and after
the cold war many more states—in Eastern Europe, Asia, and elsewhere—have
joined its economic and security partnerships. It is the multilateral logic of the
order that makes it relatively easy for states to join and rise up within the
order. Second, the liberal order offers opportunities for leadership and shared
authority. One state does not “rule” the system. The system is built around institutions, and this provides opportunities for shifting and expanding coalitions of
states to share leadership. Formal institutions, such as the IMF and World

24

G. John Ikenberry

Bank, are led by boards of directors and weighted voting. Informal groups, such as
the G- and G-, are built on principles of collective governance. Third, the
actual economic gains from participation within the liberal order are widely
shared. In colonial and informal imperial systems, the gains from trade and investment are disproportionately enjoyed by the lead state. In the existing order, the
“proﬁts of modernity” are distributed across the system. Indeed, China’s great economic ascent was only possible because the liberal international order rewarded its
pursuit of openness and trade-oriented growth. For the same reason, states in all
regions of the world have made systematic efforts to integrate into the system.
Finally, the liberal international order accommodates a diversity of models and
strategies of growth and development. In recent decades the Anglo-American
model of neoliberalism has been particularly salient. But the post-war system
also provides space for other capitalist models, such as those associated with
European social democracy and East Asian developmental statism. The global
capitalist system might generate some pressures for convergence, but it also provides space for the coexistence of alternative models and ideologies.
These aspects of the liberal international order create incentives and opportunities for states to integrate into its core economic and political realms. The
order allows states to share in its economic spoils. Its pluralistic character creates
possibilities for states to “work the system”—to join in, negotiate, and maneuver
in ways that advance their interests. This, in turn, creates an order with expanding constituencies that have a stake in its continuation. Compared to imperial
and colonial orders of the past, the existing order is easy to join and hard to
overturn.
What Rising States Want
The liberal international order was built by the Western liberal democracies, but
its basic features do not exclusively advance the interests of these countries. In fact,
as China and other non-Western developing states rise, they have already demonstrated a growing interest in the perpetuation of some sort of open and multilateral global system. These countries may not want Western dominance of global
institutions, but they want the West’s rules and organizational principles.
These rising states certainly want an open world economy. They want access to
other countries for trade, investment, and technology. It is their outward-oriented
development strategies that have propelled them forward. The ascent of these
countries began in the late s with broad-gauged reform efforts. Countries
why the liberal world order will survive

25

such as Brazil, India, Indonesia, South Africa, and Turkey broke with their closed,
authoritarian pasts and moved toward more reform-oriented and accountable
governments. Together with China, these countries opened up to the world economy. As Ted Piccone argues, they all “entered the global marketplace through an
increasing reliance on international trade, migration, remittances, energy, and foreign investment ﬂows.” This liberalization and economic openness has come
along with a mix of nationalist and populist appeals, and ideological critiques
of Western neoliberalism. More generally, however, these rising states see their
prospects for growth and advancement to be tied to engagement with and integration into a reformed and open world economy.
The rising non-Western states also have an interest in the preservation—and
perhaps the expansion—of a rules-based international system. A multilateral system of rules and institutions offers rising states some measure of protection and
equal treatment. As John Ruggie argues, multilateralism is an “institutional form
that coordinates relations among three or more states on the basis of generalized
principles of conduct: that is, principles which specify appropriate conduct for a
class of actions.” Multilateralism gives relations among states a rule-based character. The more rule-based the order is, the less it is subject to the straightforward
domination of powerful states. This sort of system of governance should be
attractive to weak and peripheral states. So, too, as rising states gain in wealth
and standing, they will want a rule-based system to protect their gains. One
fear of these states is that they will face discrimination and marginalization.
In the trade area, for example, the World Trade Organization is attractive to rising states because of its multilateral principle of equal and most-favored nation
treatment.
For these reasons, rising states have incentives to be stakeholders in some sort of
updated and reformed liberal international order. As Miles Kahler argues, Brazil,
China, and India have shown themselves to be the “conservative globalizers.”
None is directly allied with the United States, yet each has made “large bets on
opening its economy and breaking with a more autocratic past”; and along the
way their “populations have endorsed the beneﬁts of trade and foreign investment,
providing a political base for this turn to the global economy.” Rising states want
predictable and fair-minded access to and treatment within an open global system.
They resist the political domination of existing global institutions by Western
powers. But the remedy for this problem is actually the deepening of the foundations of an open and rule-based order, not its destruction.

26

G. John Ikenberry

Competitive Order Building
Even if we were to assume that China, as the leading non-Western state, wanted to
undermine and replace the existing liberal international order, the constraints on
doing so are overwhelming. Presumably, an alternative order would be less open
and less rule-based. Historically, such orders have been organized into various
illiberal political formations: regional groupings, imperial zones, spheres of inﬂuence, and closed autarkic blocs. How might China and other rising states build a
comprehensive alternative to the existing order?
As a start, China would need to be able to come forward with some alternative
set of rules and institutions, presumably reﬂecting an alternative model of political and economic organization. This might be a so-called “Beijing Consensus,”
an international order that accommodated (and even promoted) illiberal and
authoritarian polities and statist economic relations. China does have its own
statist approach, but it is not clear how this approach might work as a wider
model of global order. First, China’s mercantilist strategy seems to work best
when the rest of the world is relatively open and liberal in orientation. A closed
world in which great powers carve out spheres of inﬂuence cuts off China from
markets and investment opportunities. If all the countries of the world adopted
the Chinese model, this would restrict China’s market space and leadership
opportunities. Second, a Chinese-led illiberal international order would require
some buy-in by other states, and this is also problematic. China is the largest
and leading non-Western developing country, but it is the only rising state
that is genuinely illiberal and authoritarian. It is not clear that Brazil, India,
South Africa, or even Turkey is eager to embrace and operate within a Beijing
consensus.
If China were to try to promulgate a Sino-centered order—a hegemonic/imperial order that did not immediately rest on the consent and cooperation of other
states—it would face very steep costs. If these potential partner states did not experience substantial material beneﬁts from participating in the Chinese-led order,
China would need to spend resources to entice and bully these states into cooperation. This would be a very huge task for a developing country with mid-range
per capita income. Over the longer term, the success of a Chinese-centered order
would depend on its ability to “outcompete” liberal internationalism. But the less
the rival order is open and negotiated, and the less that China—as a rival hegemon
—is willing to exercise restraint and provide public goods, the greater the difﬁculty
it will have in establishing a viable and legitimate alternative.

why the liberal world order will survive

27

Conclusion
China and other rising states have growing opportunities to shape the rules and
institutions of the existing system. But it is very unlikely that they will do so as
part of a “power transition” moment, that is, a dramatic moment when the old
order is overturned and rising states step forward to build a new one. In the
past such moments tended to come after destructive great-power wars; but in
an age of nuclear weapons, great-power wars are less likely, and so the geopolitical
opportunities to “start from scratch” do not (and will not) exist. At the same time,
the rising states are already deeply embedded in the existing modern international
order. Their “rise” has been made possible by the openness and loosely rule-based
character of the post-war system.
Seen in this light, it might actually be the rising states that become the new constituencies for liberal internationalism, while support in the old Western industrial
democracies wanes. This would be ironic. After all, these non-Western states were
not “present at the creation” of the post-war liberal order. A hint of this possibility
emerged in January  at the World Economic Forum in Davos, where Chinese
President Xi offered a full-throated defense of the open, multilateral trade system,
while in Washington, President Trump threatened to pull back from various
regional trade agreements. Either way, whether it is the West or the rest that
poses the greater challenge to the existing order, its basic elements will likely outlast American hegemony.
NOTES













28

See Obama administration, “The National Security Strategy of the United States of America,”
Washington, D.C.: The White House, September .
For an overview of the “rise and fall” of rising states during the Obama years, see Suzanne Nossel, “The
World’s Rising Powers Have Fallen,” Foreign Policy, July , , foreignpolicy.com////bricsbrazil-india-russia-china-south-africa-economics-recession/.
For a survey of debates about rising states and global governance, see Amitav Acharya, ed., Why
Govern? Rethinking Demand and Progress in Global Governance (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, ).
E. H. Carr, The Twenty Years’ Crisis, –: An Introduction to the Study of International Relations
(London: Macmillan, ); Robert Gilpin, War and Change in World Politics (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, ); Paul M. Kennedy, The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers (New York: Random
House, ); and William Wohlforth, “The Stability of a Unipolar World,” International Security ,
no.  ().
See Susan Strange, “The Persistent Myth of Lost Hegemony,” International Organization , no. 
(), pp. –; and Susan Strange, States and Markets: An Introduction to International Political
Economy (London: Pinter Publishers, ).
For a discussion of the goals and interests of rising states, see Randall Schweller, “Managing the Rise of
Great Powers: History and Theory,” in Alastair Iain Johnston and Robert S. Ross, eds., Engaging China:
The Management of an Emerging Power (Abingdon, U.K.: Routledge, ), pp. –.
Henry Kissinger, World Order (New York: Penguin Press, ), p. .

G. John Ikenberry








G. John Ikenberry, Liberal Leviathan: The Origins, Crisis, and Transformation of the American World
Order (Princeton: Princeton University Press, ).
Ted Piccone, Five Rising Democracies and the Fate of the International Liberal Order (Washington,
D.C.: Brookings Institution, ), p. .
John G. Ruggie, ed., Multilateralism Matters: The Theory and Praxis of an Institutional Form
(New York: Columbia University Press, ), p. .
Miles Kahler, “Conservative Globalizers: Reconsidering the Rise of the West,” World Political Review,
February , . See, also, Miles Kahler, “Who Is Liberal Now? Rising Powers and Global Norms,”
in Acharya, Why Govern?
See G. John Ikenberry and Darren Lim, “China’s Emerging Institutional Statecraft: The Asian
Infrastructure Investment Bank and the Prospects for Counter-Hegemony,” Brookings Institution
Report (Project on International Order and Strategy), Washington, D.C., April .

Abstract: The crisis of the American-led international order would seem to open up new opportunities for rising states—led by China, India, and other non-Western developing countries—to
reshape the global order. As their capacities and inﬂuence grow, will these states rise up and integrate into the existing order or will they seek to overturn and reorganize it? The realist hegemonic
perspective expects today’s power transition to lead to growing struggles between the West and the
“rest” over global rules and institutions. In contrast, this essay argues that although America’s hegemonic position may be declining, the liberal international characteristics of order—openness,
rules, and multilateralism—are deeply rooted and likely to persist. And even as China seeks in various ways to build rival regional institutions, there are stubborn limits on what it can do.
Keywords: hegemony, American power, rising states, liberal international order, liberal internationalism, multilateralism, power transitions

why the liberal world order will survive

29

Reproduced with permission of copyright owner. Further
reproduction prohibited without permission.


